Introduction
:
This document describes the methods whereby the Toledo Fire & Rescue will provide high quality pre-hospital and interfacility medical care. The
document is comprehensive and covers the breadth of pre-hospital EMS care. However, we are not able to write a protocol or policy for every
situation you may encounter in the pre-hospital environment and as such, they provide a guideline for treating the majority of situations presented
to you. As always, On-Line Medical Control is available for your consultation.
Foundations
:
Definition of a Patient
:
A patient is an individual requesting or potentially needing medical evaluation or treatment. A patient provider relationship is established via
telephone, radio, or personal contact. It is your responsibility to ensure all potential patients are offered the opportunity for evaluation, treatment.
Rights of a Patient
:
Once you have begun collecting information about a patient encounter, you have an ethical obligation to protect a patient's confidential information.
It is important to take every opportunity to protect patient confidentiality. This applies to written as well as spoken communications.
Competent patients have the right to accept or refuse medical care, even if the consequences of the refusal of care may potentially be harmful for
the patient. In the event that a patient refuses care, it is important to remember the following:
1) Be courteous
2) Offer transport without some or all of the recommended treatment if the patient will allow that. Document the patient's wishes
3) Clearly advise the patient of the possible complications of their decision
4) Advise the patient to call 911 if they subsequently desire treatment and transport
5) Accurately document all components of the patient encounter
Regarding CONSENT:
1) Minors:
a) Patients under the age of 18 may not consent to medical treatment or transport. However, the following may consent for the treatment of a
minor
i) Mother or Father
ii) Legal Guardian
iii) An individual standing in loco parentis. Such persons may include a stepparent taking the responsibilities of a parent of the child.
iv) The leader of a group of children in possession of written permission from the parent authorizing emergency medical treatment (i.e.
a school field trip, etc)
b) No consent required in the following circumstances prior to initiating treatment:
i) The patient, guardian, or person standing in loco parentis cannot be reached and the minor needs to receive medical treatment.
ii) The identity of the child is unknown and a delay in giving treatment would endanger the life of the child.
iii) The effort to contact the child's parents, guardian, or person standing in loco parentis would result in a delay that would seriously
worsen the condition of the child.
c) A minor may consent to treatment without the knowledge of a parent in the following circumstances:
i) Pregnancy
ii) Treatment of STD's
iii) Alcohol or drug abuse
iv) Emotional disturbance
2) Life threatening situations without the ability to communicate:
a) A patient of any age who is unable to communicate because of an injury, accident, illness, or unconsciousness and is suffering from what
reasonably appears to be a life-threatening injury or illness should be treated under the principle of implied consent.
b) The principle of implied consent presumes that if the individual with the illness or injury were able to communicate, he or she would
consent to the emergency treatment.
c) In these situations, patients may be transported without their consent. Law enforcement, physical and/or chemical restraint may be
required.
3) Potentially life-threatening situations:
a) Patients usually present in one of two situations: the alert patient who has a concerning presentation and refuses treatment and/or
transport or the patient is intoxicated but does not have what reasonably appears to be a life-threatening injury. In these situations, the
following steps should be taken:
Letter From Medical Director
9
i) Determine orientation to person, place, and time. Document.
ii) Determine what factor(s) is/are influencing the patient to refuse medical care. Resolve those in your power (i.e. transport without
an IV).
iii) Attempt communication with spouse/significant other or family members.
iv) If patient continues to refuse, consider On-Line Medical Control or contact the medical director.
v) If patient continues to refuse care, clearly explain risks of refusal and have patient repeat those to you. Document.
vi) Assure patient they can call back for treatment and transport at any time.
Automatic notification of the Medical Director
Events that may potentially have a negative impact on patient care must be reported to the Medical Director immediately. Notification may be made
directly by phone or by contacting the on duty supervisor and/or Battalion Chief. These events include the following:
1) Surgical Airway
2) Any known complication of medical intervention or patient injury due to transport
3) Any high profile media incident
These policies, procedures, and protocols provide a foundation for providing the best possible patient care to those we encounter in the pre-hospital
environment. The way we conduct ourselves in a professional manner is as important as the care we render to the citizens we serve. These protocols
will be reviewed annually and additions or modifications made as necessary. I am happy to provide medical direction to our esteemed colleagues at
Toledo Fire & Rescue.
Sincerely,
Todd Brookens, DO, FACEP, FAAEM
ABEM Diplomate in EMS
Medical Director
 
10
