Definition of a Patient
A patient is an individual requesting or potentially needing medical evaluation or treatment. The patient-provider relationship is established via
telephone, radio, or personal contact. It is the provider’s responsibility to ensure all potential patients, regardless of the size of the incident, are
offered the opportunity for evaluation, treatment, and/or transport. The guidelines for documenting patient encounters are discussed elsewhere. 
Rights of a Patient
Patients with mental capacity retain the right to accept or refuse medical care, even if the consequences of the refusal of care may potentially be
harmful for the patient. In the event a patient attempts to refuse medical care, it is important to recall that we 
must
: 
1. Be Courteous
2. Offer transport or treatment without some (or all) of the recommended treatment(s) if that is what the patient will allow (document discussion that
led to the elected course of treatment and obtain refusal documentation including patient signature).
3. Clearly advise the patient of the possible complications of their decision up to and including harm, disability, and death.
4. Advise the patient to call back if they subsequently desire treatment and transport.
5. Accurately document all components of the patient encounter in the electronic health record (EHR).
High Risk Refusal Category
Patients with potentially life-threatening conditions generally fall into one of the two following categories:
1. The alert patient who has a concerning presentation and refuses treatment and/or transport (e.g., the patient with chest pain and EKG changes)
ora. Examples of concerning patients: Chest pain, breathing difficulty, airway obstruction, alteration in consciousness, active seizure, vital signs out of
range (*see normal vital sign ranges below), active hemorrhage, suicidal or homicidal, 
infants < 3 months old
, active labor, patients with external life-
sustaining devices such as LVAD or Zoll Life Vest, STEMI, high degree AV block, ventricular or supraventricular tachycardias, dialysis patients,
hypoglycemic diabetics on oral hypoglycemic agents (i.e. not insulin-dependent); Anaphylaxis; head injuries with depressed GCS, elderly fall patients
on blood thinners.
*Normal Vital Signs by Age Group:
Age
BP
HR
RR
0 - 3 Months
65 - 85 / 45 - 55
110 - 160
30 - 60
3 - 6 Months
70 - 90 / 50 - 65
100 - 150
30 - 45
6 - 12 Months
80 - 100 / 55 - 65
90 - 130
25 - 40
1 - 3 Years
90 - 105 / 55 - 70
80 - 125
20 - 30
3 - 6 Years
95 - 110 / 60 - 75
70 - 115
20 - 25
6 - 12 Years
110 - 120 / 60 - 75
60 - 100
14 - 22
12 - 18 Years
100 - 120 / 70 - 80
60 - 100
12 - 18
Adult @ Rest
90 -120 / 60 - 80
60 - 100
12 - 18
Normal Temperature
97.8 - 99.1 (F)
Normal EtCO
35 - 45 mmHg
Normal Pulse Oximetry
95 - 100 %
Normal CO non-smoker
0 - 5 %
2. The patient who may be intoxicated but does not have what reasonably is a life-threatening injury (e.g., the patient who has consumed alcohol
with a small laceration).
In these situations, the following steps should be taken:
Determine the patient's orientation to person, place, and time. Document results clearly and completely.
Determine what factor(s) is/are influencing the patient to refuse medical care. Resolve the ones in your power (e.g., patient does not want an IV -
2
Refusals and High Risk Refusals
19
offer transport without an IV).
Attempt communication with spouse/significant other/other family members if available.
If patient continues to refuse, contact a Paramedic Supervisor (123) if available, or Online Medical Control (OLMC)
OLMC may not order a patient who is capable to be transported but may be able to talk with the patient to convince them to seek appropriate
treatment/transport.
If patient continues to refuse, clearly explain the risks of refusal, and have the patient repeat these concerns back to you.
Document your results in the PCR.
In a courteous manner, assure the patient they can call back for treatment and transport at any time.
Determining Mental Capacity to Refuse Care
Patients can refuse care if they do not endorse suicidal or homicidal ideation, are oriented to person, place, time, and event (AAO x 4), and meet
criteria for capacity as described
Patients treated for hypoglycemia that meet criteria for non-transport require a signed treat and release.
EMS personnel shall not discuss cost, system status/unit availability, or any other non-clinical subject regarding a patient's decision to accept or
decline treatment and/or transport.
All patients refusing service shall be informed of the following:
Offered treatment and transport in a non-confrontational, polite manner.
Advised to call 911 for emergency service if desired.
Advise the patient that they accept full responsibility for their actions.
CAPACITY / REFUSAL CHECKLIST:
Is the patient age 18 or older or an emancipated minor*?
Can the patient retain and comprehend relevant information?
Can the patient believe information?
Can the patient use information to make a choice?
Is the patient NOT DANGEROUS to self or others (i.e., no suicidal or homicidal ideation)?
Emancipated Minor Definition:
In Ohio, a minor is considered emancipated when they are independent from their parents or guardian and no longer under their control. This can
happen when a minor marries, joins the military, and becomes employed and self-supporting.
Emancipated minors have the following rights and responsibilities:
They are no longer under their parent's physical custody.
They are responsible for their own support.
They can make certain decisions without their parent's permission, such as getting married, signing contracts, and entering into rental
agreements.
To be declared emancipated, a minor must:
File a petition with the court
Be living on their own
And be self-supporting
The court must also find that emancipation is in the minor's best interests.
If all are "YES" then the patient has capacity to decline further care/transport. If any are "NO" then the patient does not have capacity to make his
or her own medical decisions. Document these concepts clearly in your narrative - simply stating "alert and oriented" is not sufficient. Do not
hesitate to contact OLMC if there are questions about capacity.
Finally, do no harm and treat all patients like you want yourself or your family to be treated.
 
20
