In Toledo Fire & Rescue 
Department
, an EMS Provider's right to provide care is based on extension of the Medical Director's license to practice
medicine. If, in the opinion of the Medical Director, an action (or failure to act) on the part of an EMS Provider is of such a nature that the action or
failure to act is inconsistent with, or a violation of, these procedures, or the EMS Provider practice standard generally accepted in the medical
community, the actions described below shall occur:
1
. 
The EMT or Paramedic will be notified in writing of the issues/concerns that merit the attention of the Medical Director/Associate Medical
Director. Notwithstanding this written notice provision, the provisions of 2 and 3 below, and based on the severity and nature of the act (or
failure to act), the Medical Director/Associate Medical Director may suspend a practitioner's right to practice ALS skills upon receipt of
information sufficient in the judgment of the Medical Director to support immediate suspension in the interest of patient safety.
2
. 
A written explanation by the individual explaining the incident shall be presented to the Medical Director/Associate Medical Director within
three (3) working days of receipt of the Medical Director issues/concerns. If no written explanation of the incident is sent to the Medical
Director by that deadline, the Medical Director may base his decision upon such information that is available to him as of that deadline.
3
. 
The Medical Director or the individual may request a second meeting to further discuss the issues/concerns. If this option is exercised, the
meeting shall occur within five (5) working days of receipt of the request.
4
. 
After reviewing all materials, the Medical Director will issue a disposition of the matter. The Medical Director may exercise one or more of the
following options:
a
. 
No action taken/matter resolved.
b
. 
Remediation training.
c
. 
Warning.
d
. 
Require to precept at the approved level again.
e
. 
Temporary suspension of all ALS practice privileges or suspension of specific practice privileges.
f
. 
Revocation of practice privileges.
Such suspension and/or revocation of  practice privileges will extend to all jurisdictions where the  practitioner's right to
practice relies on the extension of the Toledo Fire & Rescue Medical Director's license to practice medicine.
5
. 
After the individual is notified in writing of the Medical Director's decision, he/she may appeal to the Medical Director. This appeal request
must be presented within five (5) working days of the decision of the Medical Director to the Medical Director.
6
. 
If a permanent revocation of  privileges is approved, the State Office of EMS will be notified of the decision.
The authority conferred herein does not apply to conduct or behavior outside the sphere of  practice that relies upon the Medical Director's
extension of right-to-practice. It does not authorize actions other than warnings, warnings with limitation on certain practices, temporary suspension
of practice rights or revocation of practice rights. 
 
EMS Provider Practitioner Disciplinary Procedure
237
