EMT - Permitted to set-up and transmit
AEMT - Permitted to set-up and transmit
PARAMEDIC
Clinical Indications:
Suspected cardiac patient (patients over 40 with medical complaint, epigastric pain, nausea, weakness, fatigue)
Suspected overdose
Electrical injuries
Syncope
CHF
Right sided MI
Procedure
 
1.
 Assess patient and monitor cardiac status.
 
2.
 If patient is unstable, definitive treatment is the priority. If patient is stable or stabilized after treatment, perform a 12 Lead ECG.
 
3.
 Prepare ECG monitor and connect patient cable with electrodes.
 
4.
 Expose chest and prep as necessary. Modesty of the patient should be respected.
 
5.
 Apply chest leads and extremity leads using the following landmarks:
RA -Right arm or as directed by manufacturer.
LA -Left arm or as directed by manufacturer.
RL -Right leg.
LL -Left leg.
V1 -4th intercostal space at right sternal border.
V2 -4th intercostal space at left sternal border.
V3 -Directly between V2 and V4.
V4 -5th intercostal space at mid-clavicular line.
V5 -Level with V4 at left anterior axillary line.
V6 -Level with V5 at left mid-axillary line.
Right side ECG necessary, go #9 below.
12 Lead ECG
255
 
6.
 Instruct patient to remain still.
 
7.
 Press the appropriate button to acquire the 12 Lead ECG.
 
8.
 Print data as per guidelines and attach a copy of the 12 lead to the PCR. Place the name and age of the patient on the paper copy of the
ECG.
 
9.
 If 
STEMI 
suspected, if able, transmit 12-Lead ECG and notify hospital of STEMI alert.
In cases of inferior injury pattern on 12 lead ECG (i.e. 
inferior STEMI
, perform Right side ECG (V4R), if this will not delay transport to
STEMI receiving facility.
 
10.
 Document the procedure, time, and results on/with the Patient Care Report (PCR).
 
11.
 An EMT may obtain and transmit a 12 Lead ECG; a Paramedic, however, should interpret it before implementing any treatment
modalities.
256
 
12.
 EMTs may assist the paramedic with attaching the 12-lead ECG electrodes but may not interpret the ECG.
 
257
