AEMT
PARAMEDIC
Clinical Indications:
Patients meet clinical indications for oral intubation.
Initial intubation attempt(s) unsuccessful.
Predicted difficult intubation.
Relative Contraindications:
Age less than eight (8).
ETT size less than 6.5mm.
Procedure
 
1. 
Prepare, position and oxygenate the patient with 100% oxygen.
 
2.
 Select proper ET tube without stylet, test cuff and prepare suction.
 
3.
 Lubricate the distal end and cuff of the endotracheal tube (ETT) and the distal 1/2 of the Endotracheal Tube Introducer (Bougie) (note:
Failure to lubricate the Bougie and the ETT may result in being unable to pass the ETT).
 
4.
 Using laryngoscopic techniques, visualize the vocal cords if possible using External Laryngeal Manipulation (ELM) as needed.
 
5.
 Introduce the Bougie with curved tip anteriorly and visualize the tip passing the vocal cords or above the arytenoids if the cords cannot
be visualized.
 
6.
 Once inserted, gently advance the Bougie until you meet resistance or "hold-up" (if you do not meet resistance, you have a probable
esophageal intubation and insertion should be re-attempted or the failed airway protocol implemented as indicated).
 
7.
 Withdraw the Bougie ONLY to a depth sufficient to allow loading of the ETT while maintaining proximal control of the Bougie.
 
8.
 Gently advance the Bougie and loaded ET tube until you have hold-up again, thereby assuring tracheal placement and minimizing the
risk of accidental displacement of the Bougie.
 
9.
 While maintaining a firm grasp on the proximal Bougie, introduce the ET tube over the Bougie passing the tube to its appropriate depth.
Airway-Bougie
260
 
10.
 If you are unable to advance the ETT into the trachea and the Bougie and ETT are adequately lubricated, withdraw the ETT slightly and
rotate the ETT 90 degrees COUNTER clockwise to turn the bevel of the ETT posteriorly. If this technique fails to facilitate passing of the ETT
you may attempt direct laryngoscopy while advancing the ETT (this will require an assistant to maintain the position of the Bougie and, if so
desired, advance the ETT).
 
11.
 Once the ETT is correctly placed, hold the ET tube securely and remove the Bougie.
 
12.
 Confirm tracheal placement according to the intubation protocol, inflate the cuff with 3 to 10 cc of air, auscultate for equal breath
sounds and reposition accordingly.
 
13.
 When final position is determined secure the ET tube, reassess breath sounds, apply end tidal CO2 monitor, and record and monitor
readings to assure continued tracheal intubation.
 
261
