AEMT
PARAMEDIC
Clinical Indications:
Patients where rapid, regular IV access is unavailable with any of the following:
Cardiac arrest.
Multisystem trauma with severe hypovolemia.
Severe dehydration with vascular collapse and/or loss of consciousness.
Respiratory failure/respiratory arrest.
Contraindications:
Fracture proximal to proposed intraosseous site.
History of Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
Current or prior infection at proposed intraosseous site.
Previous intraosseous insertion or joint replacement at the selected site.
Procedure
 
1.
 Don personal protective equipment (gloves, eye protection, etc.).
 
2.
 Identify insertion site (order of preference):
Adult:
 Distal femur (
►
yellow); Humeral Head (
►
yellow); Proximal tibia (
►
yellow/
►
blue).
Pediatric:
 Distal femur (
►
blue); proximal Tibia (
►
blue).
 
3.
 Prep the site with povidone-iodine or alcohol swab.
 
4.
 Humeral Head EZIO; Hold pt arm across chest. Identify humeral head; prep in standard fashion. Insert yellow EZIO needle at 90 degree
angle until "pop" is felt. Distal Femur IO; 2 - 3 cm above patella in midline.
 
5.
 For the EZ-IO intraosseous device, hold the intraosseous needle at a 60 to 90 degree angle aimed away from the nearby joint and
epiphyseal plate and power the driver until a "pop" or "give" is felt indicating loss of resistance. Do not advance the needle any further.
 
6.
 Remove the stylette and place in an approved sharps container.
 
7.
 Attach a syringe filled with at least 5 mL NS and aspirate bone marrow to verify placement. Then, flush with at least 5 mL NS to clear
the lumen of the needle.
 
8.
 Attach the IV line and adjust flow rate. A pressure bag may assist with achieving desired high flows.
Vascular Access EZ-IO
293
 
9.
 Stabilize and secure the needle with dressings and tape.
 
10.
 
Lidocaine
 dosing:
Adults:
 Slowly infuse 20 mg 2% lidocaine (cardiac pink box lidocaine) over 120 seconds. Wait 60 seconds before flushing with 5
- 10 mL NS. May slowly administer additional 20 mg lidocaine over 60 seconds. Consider systemic pain control for those not
responding to lidocaine.
Pediatrics:
 Slowly infuse 0.5 mg/kg 2% lidocaine (cardiac pink box lido) not to exceed 40 mg over 120 seconds. Wait 60
seconds before flushing with 2 - 5 ml NS. May slowly administer additional dose (half of initial dose = 0.25 mg/kg). Consider
systemic pain control for those not responding to lidocaine.
 
11.
 Following the administration of any IO medications, flush the IO line with 10 mL of IV fluid.
 
12.
 Document the procedure, time, and result (success) on/with the Patient Care Report (PCR).
 
294
